---
layout: post
title:  "Solutions to Exercises in Section 2.2"
date:   2016-11-20 21:00:00
categories: exercises 
---


### Exercise 2.2-1

> Express the function $$n^3/1000 - 100n^2 - 100n +3$$ in terms of $$~\Theta$$-notation.

Solution: $$\Theta(n^3)$$.


### Exercise 2.2-2

In the following, $$A$$ is an array of $$n$$ integers. The pseudocode for the
selection sort algorithm is as follows.

{% highlight java linenos %}
    selectionSort(A)
        int index = -1;
        int temp = -1;
        for j = 1 to n-1 
            index = j; 
            for i = j+1 to n 
                if A[i] < A[index] 
                    index = i;
            temp = A[j];
            A[j] = A[index];
            A[index] = temp;
{% endhighlight %}

The algorithm maintains the following two invariants.

1. At the start of each iteration $$j$$ of the for-loop at line 4, the array
$$A[1..j-1]$$ consists of the smallest $$j-1$$ elements in the original array
$$A$$ in non-decreasing order.

2. For each $$j \in \{1, \ldots, n-1\}$$, at the start of each iteration $$i$$
of the for-loop at line $$6$$, we have that  $$A[index] = \min(A[j..i-1])$$.

Please note that the after the last iteration of the for-loop at line $$4$$,
the element $$A[n] = max(A)$$; hence, $$A[n]$$ is the $$n$$-th largest number
in the sequence after the last iteration of the loop in line $$4$$.

For the complexity of the algorithm, we assume that each line in our algorithm
takes a constant amount of time. Then, lines $$2$$ and $$3$$ are each evaluated
once, line $$4$$ is evaluated $$n$$ times, and lines $$5$$ and $$9$$--$$11$$
are all evaluated $$n-1$$ times each. Line $$6$$ is evaluated
$$\sum_{j=1}^{n-1}(n-j + 1)$$ times, whereas line $$7$$ is evaluated $$\sum_{j
=1}^{n-1}(n-j)$$ times. Next, let $$t_j$$ be the number of times that line
$$8$$ is evaluated for that value of $$j$$. By putting everything together, we
have that

$$
\begin{align*}
    T(n) &= 2 + n + 4(n-1) + \sum_{j=1}^{n-1}(n-j + 1) + \sum_{j =1}^{n-1}(n-j) + \sum_{j =1}^{n-1} t_j\\
         &= n^2 + 5n -3 + \sum_{j =1}^{n-1} t_j
\end{align*}
$$

Line $$8$$ is evaluated at most as many times as line $$7$$, and so $$\sum_{j
=1}^{n-1} t_j \leq \sum_{j =1}^{n-1}(n-j) \leq n^2$$. Thus, the algorithm runs
in time $$\Theta(n^2)$$ in the best- and worst-case.

### Exercise 2.2-3

> Consider linear search again. How many elements of the input sequence need to
be checked on average, assuming that the element being searched for is equally
likely to be any element in the array? How about in the worst-case? What are
the average-case and worst-case running times in $$\Theta$$-notation?

Let $$v$$ be the value that we are searching for and let $$A$$ be an array of
$$n$$-integers. Because we assume that $$v$$ is equally likely to be any
element in the array, the probability of $$v$$ being the $$j$$-th element is
$$\frac{1}{n}$$. Furthermore, when $$v$$ occurs in the $$j$$-th position of the
array, the algorithm checks $$j$$ elements. Hence, on average, the algorithm checks

$$
\frac{1 + \cdots + n}{n} = \frac{(n+1)}{2}
$$

distinct elements. In the worst-case, the value $$v$$ occurs as the last
element of the array, and so the algorithm checks $$n$$ distinct elements.
Please note that the [linear search algorithm]({% post_url 2016-11-11-exercises-2.1 %}) 
takes $$j$$ steps when the value $$v$$ occurs at position $$j$$ in $$A$$.
Hence, the average- and worst-case running time of linear search is
$$\Theta(n)$$.


### Exercise 2.2-4

> How can we modify almost any algorithm to have a good best-case running time?

We can modify most algorithms to check for the best-case explicitly. Take for
example the problem of sorting an array of integers. Then, one can modify each
sorting algorithm by first scanning the array checking whether it is already
sorted in time $$\Theta(n)$$. In case the array is already sorted, the
algorithm returns immediately; otherwise, we proceed with the algorithm as
usual.

