---
layout: post
title:  "Solutions to Exercises in  Section 2.1"
date:   2016-11-11 18:00:00
categories: exercises 
---
We skip Exercise 2.1-1 as it is very simple.

### Exercise 2.1-2:

>Rewrite the insertion sort procedure to sort into non-increasing order.

{% highlight java linenos %}
    insertionSort(A) 
        for j = 2 to A.length
            key = A[j];
            i = j - 1;
            while (i > 0 && A[i] < key) {
                a[i+1] = a[i];
                i--;
            }
            a[i+1] = key;
        
    
{% endhighlight %}


### Exercise 2.1-3:

> Write pseudocode for linear search. Using a loop invariant, prove that your algorithm is correct.

{% highlight java linenos %}
    linearSearch(A, v) 
        for j = 1 to A.length
            if (A[j] == v)
                return j;
        return null;    
{% endhighlight %}

We next show that the following invariant holds:

>At the start of each iteration of the for loop, the subarray $$A[1\ldots
j-1]$$ does not contain the value $$v$$.

**Initialisation:** We show that the loop invariant holds before the first
iteration, when $$j =1$$. Please note that $$A[1\ldots 0]$$ is the empty array,
so the property holds immediately.

**Maintenance:** Consider an arbitrary $$1 \leq j < A.length$$ and assume that
the invariant holds before the $$j$$-th iteration of the for loop; we show that
the property holds before the $$j+1$$-th iteration as well. By the initial
assumption, we have that $$A[1\ldots j-1]$$ does not contain the value $$v$$.
We next consider two alternative cases.

* $$A[j] = v$$. Then, the for-loop terminates at this iteration, and so the
  property holds.
  
* $$A[j] \neq v$$. Then, $$A[1\ldots j]$$ does not contain $$v$$.

In either case, the invariant is maintained after each iteration.

**Termination:** We consider two cases.

* The algorithm terminates on line $$4$$ on some iteration $$j$$. Then, we have
  that $$A[j] = v$$, and so the algorithm is correct.
  
* Otherwise, the algorithm terminates at line $$5$$. But then, the for loop
  terminated when $$j = A.length +1$$. So, by the invariant, we have that $$A$$
  does not contain the value $$v$$, and so the algorithm is correct.


### Exercise 2.1-4:

> Consider the problem of adding two n-bits binary integers, stored in two $$n$$-elements
arrays $$A$$ and $$B$$. The sum of the two integers should be stored in binary form in an
$$(n+1)$$-element array $$C$$. State the problem formally and write pseudocode
for adding the two integers.

We start by formalising the problem at hand. We represent each binary number
$$x_1 \ldots x_n$$ using an $$n$$-element sequence of numbers $$\langle x_1
\ldots x_n\rangle$$. Please note that the least significant bit is the last element of
the array.

* * *

*Binary addition:*

**Input:**: Two $$n$$ bits binary numbers $$a_1 \ldots a_n$$ and $$b_1 \ldots
b_n$$ stored in two arrays $$A = \langle a_1, \ldots, a_n\rangle$$ and $$B =
\langle b_1, \ldots, b_n\rangle$$.

**Output**: The binary number $$c_1 \ldots c_{n+1}$$ that is the result of
adding $$a_1\dots a_n$$ and $$b_1\dots b_n$$ stored in an $$n+1$$-element
sequence of numbers $$C = \langle c_1, \ldots, c_{n+1}\rangle$$.

***

The algorithm below solves the binary addition problem. 

{% highlight java linenos %}
    binaryAddition(A, B)
        int[] C = new int[n+1]
        int sum;
        for j = n downto 1
            sum = C[j+1] + A[j] + B[j];
            C[j+1] = sum % 2 // the actual value of the j+1 bit
            C[j] = sum / 2 // the carry 
        return C;    
{% endhighlight %}


