---
layout: post
title:  "Solutions to Exercises in Section 1.2"
date:   2016-11-09 21:00:00
categories: exercises 
---

### Exercise 1.2-1:
    
> Give an example of an application that requires algorithmic content at the
application level, and discuss the function of the algorithms involved.

Shazam is a mobile application that identifies the media playing around the
user. To do this, Shazam maintains a record of sound waves corresponding to
known songs. When the user needs to identify a particular song playing in the
background, the application uses the device's microphone to record the external
audio, and then compares the resulting sound wave against the list of known
waves. The aim is to find the sound wave that is as close as possible to the
recorded sound and output the name of the corresponding song. To solve this
pattern recognition problem, the application needs to use sophisticated and
efficient algorithms.

### Exercise 1.2-2:

> Suppose we are comparing implementations of insertion sort and merge sort
on the same machine. For inputs of size $$n$$, insertion sort runs in
time $$8n^2$$, while merge sort runs in $$64n \log n$$ steps. For which values of
$$n$$ does insertion sort beat merge sort?

We need to check for which interval of the natural numbers the following inequality holds.

$$ 8 \cdot n^2 < 64 \cdot n \log(n) $$

By applying standard manipulations of inequalities, we have that the above inequality
holds if and only if 

$$ n < 8 \cdot \log(n) $$

This inequality holds for each $$1 \leq n \leq 26$$.


### Exercise 1.2-3:

> What is the smallest value of $$n$$ such that an algorithm whose running time is $$100n^2$$
runs faster than an algorithm whose running time is $$2^n$$ on the same machine?

For $$n= 14$$, we have that 

$$
100 * n^2 = 19600 \text{ and } 2^n = 16384.
$$

For $$n= 15$$, we have that 

$$
100 * n^2 = 22500 \text{ and } 2^n = 32768.
$$

Hence, $$n=15$$ is the least such value.
